>> [BACKGROUND] Good evening. The time is now 7:00 PM,
and I'll call to order town council meeting of Tuesday, December 2nd.
We're going to begin with an invocation,
followed by a moment of silence,
and then a Pledge of Allegiance.
If all those that are able,
please join me in standing.
>> Let us pray. Almighty God,
we gather here today with gratitude and a commitment to service as we conduct business.
May you guide us and grant us wisdom to be
good stewards of the resources entrusted to us,
honoring the past while investing in a strong future. Amen.
>> Amen.
>> We will now pause for a moment of silence.
>> Please join me in the Pledge of Allegiance.
>> [PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE]
>> May we have a roll call, please?
>> Mayor Kuretski?
>> Here.
>> Vice Mayor Delaney?
>> Councilor Choy?
>> Here.
>> Councilor Guisinger?
>> Councilor Sundstrom?
>> Here.
>> Town Manager Kitzerow?
>> Town Attorney Baird.
>> Here.
>> Thank you. We begin tonight.
First item on the agenda,
we have an exciting item.
It's presentation on the Centennial Art and Poetry Contest winners.
>> Good evening, council and members of the public here.
We have an exciting item for you tonight.
Let me just pull it up here,
on our art and poetry contest.
Our department, Planning and Zoning,
has done over 20 events for celebrating the centennial, starting in January.
We've got one next week coming up, hopefully,
if we can get another two bus tours and open house and
a children's archaeological event next week at the Sawfish Bay Park.
But tonight, we want to talk about celebrating
the students who submitted for the art and poetry contest,
and with us today is Thatcher Hart.
He is senior planner and Historic Resources Board liaison.
I'm going to open this up. There we go.
>> Good evening, council, pleasure to be here.
This is an exciting item that we can be here and celebrate.
As mentioned by Stephanie Thoburn,
the art and poetry contest here was for students in the area.
What we were working with is that we gave the students in
the area a prompt of what does Jupiter mean to them.
With that, they had to provide a piece of art for K through fifth grade.
Then they also had to submit a piece of art as well as a essay
or a piece of poetry to go along with the art,
describing the art and going with the same theme of what Jupiter really means to them.
Like I said, it was for students within the Jupiter area.
It was open to anyone that was willing to apply for both private,
public, and home-schooled students.
It was, in collaboration,
judged by the Town of Jupiter Art Committee.
We worked with them, and they went through
the submissions and worked to determine who would win the awards.
We broke down the submissions into four divisions.
The first division was kindergarten through second grade,
and they were required to submit one piece of art only.
Division 2 is third grade through fifth grade, with one piece of art.
Then for the middle school division,
they were required to submit the one piece of art as well as
one essay or piece of poetry to go along with their artwork.
As well as high school,
they had to provide a piece of art as well as one essay piece of poetry.
Really important to mention that we couldn't do
this with our sponsors, the Loxahatchee Guild.
They were graciously supportive of this effort
and providing us the awards that the students will receive tonight.
Kim Ryan here is tonight and representing Loxahatchee Guild,
as well as Mary Therese.
We're really grateful for them to provide support for this effort.
As well, we collaborated with the Palm Beach County Library system
and worked with Bernadette Dickson to work with them and
we will be presenting or displaying the artwork that won
tonight's contest at the Jupiter Branch Library as well for the public to see.
We'll start with Division 1,
which is kindergarten through second grade.
We'll call up the winners here and we have a nice little goody bag for them. I'm sorry?
>> If I may come up?
>> Yes, please. Do you want to do the honors?
>> You want me to say something?
>> Sure.
>> Good evening. We're from the Loxahatchee Guild,
and Mary Therese, our president, is here as well.
We just want to say how happy we are to be with you on this.
You know we've supported you in past projects,
and we're proud of that.
We're proud of what you've accomplished and what we've accomplished.
It was fun to do this.
I'm a retired guidance counselor,
so it's fun to see kids again.
[LAUGHTER] Thank you for including us on this.
>> Awesome. We have the first-place winner in Division 1.
We have Oliver. Oliver here?
I don't believe Oliver is here, actually,
but he won a $50 gift card,
so congratulations to Oliver.
[APPLAUSE] For Division 2, which is third grade rough fifth grade,
they also had a piece of art.
In second place, we had Shiven Solanki. Is she here?
No? Shiven also we won a $25 gift card.
[APPLAUSE] In first place for Division 2,
we have Ethan Tagle.
Is Ethan here? [APPLAUSE].
>> Congratulations.
>> Congratulations. Very good job.
>> Excellent. Congratulations, Ethan.
[APPLAUSE] For Division 3,
which is middle school, they had to submit the one piece of art as well
as essay or poetry to go along with it.
For third place, we have Summer Hahner.
Is Summer here? Excellent. Come on up. [APPLAUSE]
>> Congratulations, my dear.
>> Congratulations.
>> Thank you.
>> Congratulations. [APPLAUSE] For second place in Division 3,
we have Belleami Dickson. [APPLAUSE]
>> Congratulations.
>> Thank you.
Just like the mom. [APPLAUSE]
>> Then, for first place within Division 3 is Payton Lau. [APPLAUSE]
>> Nice job.
>> Thank you.
>> Congratulations. [APPLAUSE] Then, for our last division,
which was high school, which was the piece of art,
as well as the essay and poetry,
third place was Veronica Scheid.
Is Veronica here? Excellent.
[APPLAUSE] Congratulations, Veronica.
[APPLAUSE] For second place in Division 4, we have Preston Lau.
[APPLAUSE] Excellent. Congratulations. Then,
for our final winner tonight,
on first place in Division 4,
we have Alice Lin.
Is Alice here? No?
>> No.
>> Unfortunately.
>> Well, congratulations to all participants.
[APPLAUSE] If everyone could come on up,
that would be interested in taking a picture with the council,
we would like to get a group photo.
[BACKGROUND]
>> One step up. There we go.
Then, councilors, if you can stand behind [inaudible] There we go.
[LAUGHTER] Thank you, and the town manager.
>> If I could have front row slightly stand behind.
>> Behind?
>> Yeah, right behind. [BACKGROUND]
>> A little bit more.
[LAUGHTER] You can try to face the
[inaudible] [APPLAUSE]
>> [BACKGROUND] Thank you, everyone, for participating.
As I mentioned previously,
copies of the art will be on display at the Jupiter Branch Library,
and the actual essays and poetry are available
for review on our town webpage on the centennial webpage.
Thank you all very much, appreciate it.
>> Thank you to the students,
to the parents for encouraging them, and family members.
Thank you especially, Loxahatchee Guild,
for helping to sponsor this. Thank you.
[BACKGROUND] Next, we have a presentation on anchored vessels,
an update from our police chief.
>> Good evening, Mayor, town council.
Interim Chief Don Hennessy of the police department.
We want to take a few minutes tonight to go through to
provide you and the community with an update as
to some of the efforts taken by JPD staff on the anchored vessel issue,
and also some of our plans moving forward with the program.
We're going to start with some of the removals that have occurred over the past year.
We'll talk about what the current situation looks like,
what anchored vessels are currently within Jupiter's waterways and their locations.
We're going to discuss a new program that launched a couple of months ago,
called Operation Barnacle Busters.
Then we'll conclude with legislative update on two major House bills
that have gone through the legislature and have or are going to take effect shortly.
To start with, look at the derelict vessel removals over the past year.
The Jupiter Police Marine Unit has coordinated the removal of three vessels; one,
August 1st of '25,
and the other two were back in March of '25.
That's consistent with the prior year.
There were three vessels removed also that year as well.
Again, those vessels were the Billy B,
the Obsession II, and Last Fling.
Current status of vessels inside Jupiter's waterways,
we had the marine unit go out and give us a status of where we sit today with vessels.
You'll see the majority of the vessels in
the Top 2 categories there sit in the intercoastal waterway,
south of Indiantown Road,
just south of the bridge.
Then there were 12 in the area of Burt Reynolds West.
There were a couple of vessels in other locations,
but they seem to be congregating in those two main areas of the town's waterways.
There we go. To talk about Operation Barnacle Busters,
and we've introduced this in some prior meetings in very vague terms,
but I want to take a second to go through and tell you where it came from.
Members of our marine unit and our dive team came up with
the idea to inspect vessels' means of propulsion,
which is one of the requirements by
Florida State Statute that a vessel have an effective means of propulsion.
To do that, we always had concerns about whether we were
going to have people test their propulsion from a safety factor.
If we're saying they can't propulse,
what is the way to do that safely?
Well, our staff came up with an idea to
utilize our underwater recovery team, our dive team,
to go underwater and take photos and try to inspect
these propulsion systems from a more manual standpoint.
We began this in September of 2025.
During that first inspection,
there were 18 written warnings issued for not having effective means of propulsion.
Now you'll see on the right-hand side of the slide there,
that's two photos of two of the prop systems that the marine unit and dive team located.
They actually went up and physically tried to manipulate
those props and found that they were not able to turn and not able to move.
There were 18 written warnings issued in September of 2025.
The following month, as we're enforcing this,
the statute requires a minimum of 30 days between violations,
so we weren't able to go out and do the next round of inspections until October of 2025.
During that, of the 18,
nine were remaining with violations in our waterways.
Nine citations were written for that violation.
Those nine citations will be the first level
of three citations that could possibly lead to a designation of an at-risk vessel,
which then would start the process of removal.
Again, we're one round of citations through this.
We have a second round of inspections,
which technically be our third round,
but our second round of citation inspections.
That will take place December 9th.
That's already coordinated with our underwater recovery team,
and our marine needs to go do those inspections.
We'll be following up with all of the vessels in Jupiter's waterways on a monthly basis,
particularly those with violations.
Once a vessel comes into compliance,
we'll look at inspecting that vessel quarterly,
just to make sure that once they've resolved
the condition that caused them to be in violation,
we want to make sure it stays there.
Those will be put on a quarterly inspection process.
>> Again, I mentioned at the beginning,
there were two new house bills that passed.
This one, House Bill 481 took effect already July 1 of 2025.
This house bill allows local municipalities,
specifically municipalities and counties that have a population of 1,500,000. or more,
which limits it to four coastal counties: Hillsboro,
Palm Beach, Broward, and Miami Dale.
Orange County also meets the definition.
However, the more inland and don't really apply here.
I will tell you the current statute,
what it actually requires is a little ambiguous.
At the time they're still working through some definitions on it.
But what it basically requires,
it allows us to create an ordinance that regulates overnight anchoring to where
a vessel cannot anchor for more than 30 days in a six month period.
Now, a couple of questions I have with that,
is it 30 consecutive days in that six month period,
and is it in the same location?
For instance, if somebody's anchored at Burt Reynolds Park,
and they relocate down south of Indian Town Road Bridge,
does that start the clock all over again?
The statute is not clear at this point on what we're allowed to regulate in that case,
there's still some clarity that has to be done on that.
One other thing to mention with
House Bill 481 and the possible creation of that ordinance,
possible violations would be dealt with through the Municipal ordinance citation system.
Those municipal citations would not count
towards the consecutive violation rule that would lead to removal.
Therefore, if we were to create an ordinance here,
it would not advance towards removal of that vessel,
it would only follow our municipal citation system.
There are only two municipalities that have
currently enacted ordinances under this house bill.
One is Miami Dale and the other is the town of Palm Beach,
due to the fact that this is new since it started in July,
there's been limited results and
limited reviews on how efficient it is in taking care of anchored vessel problem.
Staff will continue to monitor those two ordinances and
any future changes to this House bill to see if it adds any more clarity moving forward.
The other House bill,
House Bill 1149,
this one has not yet taken effect,
but is scheduled to take effect,
January 1 of 2026.
This is more of a state level bill versus the ordinance.
This creates a permit process that is coordinated by
the Fish and Wildlife Commission that would allow vessels to apply for,
and obtain a long term anchoring permit.
The way they defined long term anchoring is you can anchor any,
this gets a little confusing,
but it's anywhere within a one nautical mile of a documented anchorage point.
Basically, to put it in simple terms,
if I anchor outside Burt Reynolds and I call the state to get a permit,
and they issue me that permit then that
long term anchoring permit allows me to anchor anywhere
within 1.15 miles of Burt Reynolds Park of where I was.
That would be something where we don't have any say
in who gets the permits or how the permits are issued.
Those are strictly issued by Fish and Wildlife.
We've been in communication with Fish and Wildlife.
They're still in the process of creating
this permit process and identifying what that looks like.
Staff have been constantly reaching out to
them to check to see if they've made any progress,
where they sit with it and what exactly that looks like.
I will tell you that any violations, say, for example,
somebody was anchoring within Jupiter's Waterways,
and they did not have one of these permits,
and they violate that long term anchoring rule,
it would result in a uniform boating citation,
which is a state level citation that would then count
towards subsequent violations toward removal.
This would give us the opportunity to evaluate that for subsequent violations.
We will continue to monitor the implementation of this statute,
as like I said, the program is not fully fleshed out by the state at this point,
but we're going to keep our eyes on this thing and see if that may
be the most efficient option for the town moving forward.
Some key takeaways,
Police Department remains proactive in vessel monitoring and enforcement efforts.
The Barnacle Busters operation.
Again, I give credit to the Marine Unit and our underwater recovery team
for putting that together and having the idea to think outside the box,
and come up with a solution to try to help us manage this.
Then Police Department staff is continuing monitoring new and proposed legislation,
including House Bill 481 and 1149.
With that, I can take any questions you may have regarding the new legislation,
Barnacle busters or our activities so far.
>> Counsel, have any questions?
>> I have a couple of questions. On your page 5,
chief, you mentioned the 18 written.
Well, first of all, are people living on these boats?
>> Some of them, yes.
>> Do you know if are they residents of the town or there's out of town folks?
[OVERLAPPING] Come down the warm weather or?
>> I don't know where they live, the specific boats.
>> On the 18 written warnings and 9 citations,
were those 9 written warnings?
Were they corrected then so you didn't have for any more citations?
>> Some of them were corrected.
Some of the people fixed the problem that we identified,
and some of them had moved on to other locations.
>> My last question,
under that create the permitting process that the State may be looking at,
do those vessels as part of their permitting process have to show operability?
>> They do not. There is a stipulation in
the statute that if those vessels do become derelict at any point or at risk,
then that permit it will be vacated,
so they will lose their permit,
but that's going through the full derelict process as we would now.
There's no scheduled regular inspections required.
>> Thank you. Good presentation. I appreciate the answers too.
>> Counsel San any questions.
>> No questions. I just want to say that I greatly appreciate this police department.
I appreciate your leadership,
Chief Hennessy, for being so proactive.
I mean, from being in touch with FWC on this House bill and
following up with them constantly to proactively checking,
using the dive teams, all of that.
I just want to say it's very impressive. Thank you.
>> Thank you.
>> Any questions?
>> Yes, I do. I will go back to page 5, Operation Barnacle.
When citations or written warnings are given,
how do you communicate that to the vessel owner?
>> A lot of times they're certified mailed.
If they're actually on the vessel,
it's delivered by hand.
Those who are not on the vessel,
they're delivered by certified mail.
>> But you do have access to an address because?
>> Yes. We have identified owners of all of these vessels.
>> With those citations or warnings,
are there any monetary fines imposed to these folks?
>> What happens is it goes through the state court process,
so they will go through the court process and then that judge or Magistrate would impose
those fines at that point keeping in
mind that as we go through two subsequent violations,
the first, the second, the third,
it does require adjudication of anything other than dismissed or not guilty.
As long as that violation is
adjudicated with some form of guilt, that would then count towards.
>> You're able to access all that as you move
forward if you'd be the second or third or fourth time?
>> Correct. Our officers have developed a very intense system of tracking these.
I'm impressed as I go through.
I actually went through it yesterday.
Our Marine officers are very on top of this,
very on top of the tracking.
I've asked them specifically about where a vessel
is in the process and they can tell me right off the pat.
>> That's great. I do want to say thank you as well.
This is very impressive.
I'm pleased to see that you're on the legislature side as well.
Great job. Thank you.
>> Good evening, Chief. Been monitoring this for years,
and I've always appreciate all the hard work you guys have put into this because I know
it's an arduous task and get you guys out of what you need to do.
Barnacle buses was a great idea.
Who came up with that? That was fantastic.
>> It was our Marine unit. [OVERLAPPING]. One in particular.
>> Of the 9 vessels that some were cited and of the 9 that some left the area,
and the ones that remained,
did they clear just the propulsion system,
or did they clear the whole haul?
Did they haul the boat and they have a scraper go in there and clean the whole thing,
or they just get in by with clean up the prop and the run?
>> This was specifically tailored towards the propulsion system.
In order to show that they rectified the problem that we cited them for,
that was where we were focused on.
>> Did they all look the same,
were they all just gummed up with barnacles?
>> A lot of them were similar to the photos they saw.
>> Now, what about sailboats?
Sailboats don't have to have running gear, correct,
to make way legally in this situation?
>> I know that they have to have that means of propulsion,
which means that sail could act as that means of propulsion.
To my knowledge, and Captain Banski,
correct me if I'm wrong, none of these were sailboats.
None of these that we're dealing with right now are sailboats.
>> We've had sailboats in the past.
We have the blue moon off of right inside the inlet there.
I went by that many times in my boat,
and his rigging was derelict.
If he put his main sail up, it would tear.
He didn't have propulsion, but he claimed that he did.
Do we monitor that also?
>> We look at all the vessels that come in,
and you'll see on the quarterly report,
there are some sail boats on there.
I'll get with the Marine and make sure we're stand on top of those sail.
>> I was just wondering if there's different criteria for means of propulsion, too, so.
>> They're very vague in the statute.
It just has to be a means of propulsion.
If that sail works and it can push the boat.
Again, that's a tougher one to test
because you don't want to start it moving and then you can't stop.
[LAUGHTER].
With a 30 day if you get the license anchor for 30 days,
but you can move anywhere within a mile,
but it's to a different anchorage area,
correct? Not just anywhere.
>> No. According to the ordinance that we're allowed to create,
they have not specified that yet.
If we were to create that ordinance,
it tells me they're allowed to basically go anywhere in the way it reads,
it says anywhere in the county.
There's a lot of work to do left on that bill, I think.
[OVERLAPPING]. As far as I can tell,
an ordinance would not prevent them from moving.
>> Thank you. Appreciate it for great work.
>> Just a couple of comments. Number 1,
this has been a strategic initiative for a number of years,
and I think how far we've come.
From when we first included this,
we really didn't know how we were going to proceed on it,
but we had environmental concerns for the Blue moon and others.
But what strikes me here in the keep takeaways is
the police department has done just a phenomenal job and kudos to the team,
and I just highlight, remains proactive.
Under emphasizes, I think how extraordinary this is because I think it's commendable.
The one thing proactive would be,
we've got a kittens going and you see them and you take action on them.
But this goes beyond that to stepping it
up significantly with the brainstorming and then doing the barnacle busters.
Then on top of that to be continually monitoring proposed legislation.
We already were at a high level of performance in this one,
but I think I'd be remiss not to emphasize, really,
this is absolutely commendable and on behalf of all of our residents in the council,
thank you very much of the team.
>> Thank you.
>> Thank you, Mayor. Appreciate it.
>> Moving on to citizen comments.
Do we have any citizen comments?
>> No, sir.
>> Moving on to the minutes.
Counsel, we have before us,
the minutes to the November 18th meeting.
I didn't see any corrections on the dias.
If there are none, I'd take a motion in a second to approve the minutes as submitted.
>> I'll make a motion that we accept the minutes of November 18, 2025 as submitted.
>> Second.
>> Motion and second. All in favor signify by saying aye.
>> Aye.
>> Motion carries unanimously.
Moving on to the consent agenda items.
These are items 4 through 13.
Was there any member of the public that wished to pull a consent agenda item?
>> No, sir.
>> Is there any member on the dias wishes to pull a consent agenda item?
>> Yes. I like to pull item number 11,
which is resolution 130 dias 25.
>> Any others?
>> To items.
>> I pulled number 4 and number 12.
I'll take a motion in a second approving
the amended consent agenda consisted of items 5 through 10, and then number 13.
>> Second.
>> Motion is second. All in favor,
signify by saying aye.
>> Aye.
>> Motion carries unanimously.
On agenda item 4,
this is as judicial.
Does counsel have any ex parte disclosures?
>> I spoke with staff.
>> I just visited the site.
I didn't had lunch there.
>> I did talk with Planning and Zoning Director John Sickler,
and I was asking for some staff suggested language that could be added to the resolution
to prohibit future conversion of any parking spaces to
restrict it in use to a privileged view.
Since I pulled this one,
I pulled it and in the past,
I've had a number of conversations with Planning and Zoning.
I see that an unintended consequence in my opinion,
when you do allow a shared parking,
which is not an entitlement,
that sometimes the designation of spaces,
limiting them to a privileged few,
in my opinion, has gotten out of hand in certain shopping centers.
I know I've worked with Mr. Sickler on one of them in particular,
and I know he's been great on following up with
the property owner to get those what seems to be ongoing violations resolved.
But what happens is that I think a shopping center,
every space should be available to everybody,
short of the handicap one.
So when you start seeing popping up signs, it says, No,
this is only for this person or that per,
this business or that business,
it is allowed by the code.
But I've concluded that I've seen so much of this in cases that I think is wrong,
that I'm not inclined to ever approve
shared parking without coming back to us.
I'd asked John to give me a suggested language,
which she was kind enough in doing,
and if counsel were to agree with me,
I would just add a provision and this was
John's suggested language that would read under parking.
Parking spaces shall not be reserved for use by
a specific tenant or customers of a specific tenant within the plaza.
We're granting shared use,
which allows them to go ahead and change the uses in the Plaza without adding parking.
But then this Plaza cornajine and I would think it's the case.
There is no current instances of that happening.
But I just don't want it to happen.
So one condition for me to approve it would be, adding this condition.
I don't know if counsel agrees or disagrees,
but if there's an agreement, I'd like to add that.
>> Would that be Town wide or just the specific?
>> One of these has to be done specifically.
>> Specifically, right.
>> When you're acting upon a site plan,
it would be one of the conditions.
Right now, the resolution includes a condition.
Allowing more intensive use that could only happen with shared parking.
That would still stand.
But in designating this,
there would be this provision that parking spaces
shall not be reserved for use by
a specific tenant or customers of a specific tenant in the Plaza.
>> I would agree with that.
>> I have two questions for that.
Can I get some examples of what you mean by restricted spaces?
Is it like loading zones or what types of restrictions qualify?
>> Well, a couple of shopping centers in particular that I've seen,
one that I happened to go to.
>> Plaza name, but it's escaped me right now,
but nonetheless, it's in Abacoa and military.
But like one I go to,
I see six or eight signs that are
limiting parking to its changed over time what it was defined as,
to 15 minutes or three minutes or something.
I've seen the uses change.
I look at the uses there,
and the uses don't warrant,
in my mind, special parking spaces, every customer,
and so what happens is these spaces don't get used.
They sit vacant, or alternatively,
people who are using them, no one's going to do anything about it,
so I'm just going to park in it.
But they're front spots and this happens to be one of the shopping centers.
What is the number of medical offices?
Somebody, not with a handicap tag, likewise,
still can't use a front spot because the sign prohibits
that or implies you're prohibited from using it.
>> You have the 15-minute sign or
on the curb that stops your tires is reserved for such and such,
like two or three outside of a specific business.
Don't park here unless you're coming in here.
>> We also have COVID.
The post-COVID stuff is still around with groceries,
and in this case,
this is specific to this; it's not.
>> It's only this one.
>> But you're suggesting that this be the case always.
>> Well, first of all,
we don't often get a request,
how many new projects do we have that's that big that we could have?
It's less likely now that the towns built out.
Those that already have shared use already have shared use and come in,
and staff can approve it.
I'm not talking about a code change,
but I'm just saying if we're going to add to the inventory of
large centers that parking areas that have to allow them to do shared use.
I'm okay with it when I see what it's for.
But when you're depriving residents of using spots,
that's where I disagree.
In fact, I was going by one.
I'd rather not reference business right now,
but the other day, I was going by,
and I saw these two spots.
It is in an area that there's a lot of use of the parking.
I went over there, and I took a snap a picture of it.
The proprietor saw me taking a picture, came out,
and said, but I didn't want to engage in the conversation.
I was just taking a picture,
but it's a proprietor who says,
Well, they have some older customers that go there,
and they want them to have an upfront spot.
I haven't checked with staff yet,
but I don't believe it was approved.
But these things just appear.
Well, everybody would want a front spa for their customers,
but the whole point is, it's in a shopping center, it could be,
it should be, whoever comes should be able to use the space.
>> This outdoor seating is a holdover from COVID?
>> This is an outdoor seating.
This is not an outdoor seating area here.
In this one, they're changing the use to include it says outdoor seating in here,
but in addition, they're also changing the use,
I think, to add more medical or something.
I'd have to go back and look at [OVERLAPPING].
Again, I'm okay with granting that shared parking,
but not the unintended consequence that can happen,
and then those are difficult to investigate and code enforcement.
>> I agree.
>> Just a question, Jim, sorry.
Mayor, how would we know when a landlord has leased out
a particular segment in a property and
has given the tenant two spaces in front or three spaces,
as we know some of the smaller plazas,
so where do we cut it off from a larger parking to a smaller?
>> First of all, if somebody has shared parking,
approved, then staff actually does, you know,
our planning and zoning department staff manages that.
>>They would have to monitor.
>> They would have to come in.
It's not practical, really, to monitor it.
But if it was brought to their attention and they hadn't approved it,
they can reject it,
and then the signs have to be pulled down.
But there are a few centers. I tell you what.
In my mind, it's because once they
realize it's happening and they're getting away with it,
you start seeing a whole bunch.
>> Sometimes they use the temporary signs also.
>> I'm okay with that on a case-by-case basis.
I know Abacoa is the baseball parking,
it's all tiered, there could be use changes there in downtown. I could see a pickup.
>> This is not downtown.
>> The one that military trail.
>> The military rail,
but it's one that has a lot of medical uses.
>> I think we've all seen that.
I think it's inconvenient.
I'm supportive on a case-by-case basis,
and this being one. That's fine.
>> I'll take a motion in a second with adding this condition, please.
>> Motion with the addition of the mayor's condition?
>> Second.
>> Motion a second. All in favor,
signify by saying aye.
>> Aye. [OVERLAPPING]
>> Motion carries unanimously.
Moving on to Item 11 pulled by Councilor.
>> May I still have one more question on Number 4?
Just a question on the lighting and when they fail, who's monitoring this?
This sounds like, in this particular case, it's ongoing.
Who goes around and does these inspections?
Are they on an honor system?
If they're on an honor system,
the lights wouldn't be failing.
>> For the condition, excuse me,
John Sickler, for the record, planning and zoning.
The owner is going to be responsible for
maintaining records and doing monthly inspections.
They're required to provide the town with a report annually of that,
but we can also request or do an inspection at any time to check the purposes.
the lights have been many lights out at that plaza.
They have lighting, you may be familiar with,
that outlines the perimeter edge of the coping of the building or the parapet walls.
Excuse me, that's just been a persistent issue,
so the Planning Commission, in particular,
had asked that some of these issues be dealt with a little bit more deliberately,
and that we set a standard,
and that's when we established the more deliberate inspection process and record keeping.
>> Makes sense. Thank you. Appreciate that.
>> Moving on to agenda Item 11, Counsel Guisinger.
>> I asked this jet item to be pulled.
I'd like to make a revision to it.
Staff worked on this revision for me the last couple of days,
and you should have a copy of it on the dias with you.
But primarily, it was when the presentation was made on November 6,
part of that presentation was requesting town support for
Jupiter Narrows Conservation Alliance efforts to name
the Mangrove Island in Honor of Andrew Reed Harris.
That specific statement was missing from the resolution.
You have an amended copy here.
I'd like to make a motion to amend that resolution as follows.
One is really minor; we combined Paragraphs 4 and 5
of the resolution because they are pretty much the same.
We added the sixth paragraph or the last paragraph,
which reads, whereas the town council, excuse me,
the town council of the town of Jupiter supports the JCNA efforts to officially name the
up Narrows Mango violence in honor of Andrew Reed Harris.
>> I second.
>> That is consistent with what I recollect.
Thank you for getting that incorporated.
>> Thank you to the staff for working out in
the last couple of days and making that change for me.
I appreciate it particularly that John Sickler was involved with it. I appreciate it.
>> I don't remember. Did you make a motion?
>> I made a motion and a second.
>> Motion a second. All in favor.
Signify by saying aye.
>> Aye.
>> Motion carries unanimously.
Moving on to Item 12,
the last item pulled from consent.
I pulled this item.
I pulled this one, and I've had some history on this particular item here,
but I pulled this one because I'm just concerned about allowing for one-year renewals.
Staff went out and came back with a contract,
and for a one-year term,
we need to have a contract,
so at this point in time, I'll support that,
but I don't support the one-year renewals, the four of them.
The reason I don't, I'll say,
is that, in May,
we had this bid,
and there were six bidders.
Now there are three.
The apparent low bidder from that May bidding didn't submit a bid now,
which I think was predictable to me.
Further, the low bidder increased their bid 30% since May.
I did talk to the staff of that 30% increase,
13 and a half percent was due to a scope increase.
They added an allowance for schools out camps days.
But there was a 16.5% cost increase.
When this was bid in May,
the low bidder at that time was 15% lower.
Realizing that the bids,
we've got the number of bidders went down from 6-3,
and the low bidder before didn't submit a bid,
and I'm confident that with the new procurement manager that
our reputation for seeking competitive proposals will improve.
I want that opportunity after one year use to come back and see what what the market has.
But again, my concern is just that this is basically
30% higher than we had another bidder for just six months ago on, same scope basis.
An event, so it's up to the council,
but so I would.
I'm supportive of the contract,
but not making it very clear that I don't want to allow each year for us to
do the one-year renewal because I think I'd like to see it we bid again.
>> Is there any benefit to seeing a one-year renewal in a multi-year renewal?
>> Well, we always put the renewal feature in there if you're satisfied,
if you feel you have competitive pricing,
and you're satisfied with the vendor.
There's a cost to bid.
>> But we're not getting any break for giving options for
renewal on the contract? The town.
>> Do we have the option to renew each year?
>> We have the option.
>> Could I actually ask staff to come up and speak to this?
Because I know in the past, we've had
some emergency situations with transportation for summer camp.
There may be a benefit.
>> Mike Haufman, Community Services.
Good evening, Mayor, Council members.
The idea of the one-year renewal was to actually get out of a contract in
case they couldn't meet the standard and services of having the bus services,
which we've had experiences with in the past so that was the idea and the intent of it,
and I understand the mayor's concerns, but,
if they were not able to meet those standards,
we were able to exit the contract.
>> I think in the past, there was a problem with meeting the standard, not just cost.
We can get out of it.
If we think it's a good idea to rebid for cost purposes or for performance purposes.
>> That's a good question.
Could it be either or cost performance?
>> Correct.
>> Do we have to give them a certain amount of time that it's going to be performing?
>> It's just through one year.
We just evaluate throughout the year.
>> What if six months in,
they're just dropping the ball and it's not working out,
we have the right to terminate the contract? Move on?
>> I would need to. Yes.
>> Bidder, my understanding,
the bidder that's being awarded the contract,
we've used for years,
so it's unlikely to have performance issues.
On a bidder you've used for years.
It comes down to the cost.
I'll take a motion in a second.
However, Council wishes to do it.
>> Well, I'll make a motion that we just accept the one-year term.
>> Second.
>> Is that a second?
>> Any discussion?
>> No.
>> Take a motion, we have a motion a second to proceed with a one-year contract term.
All in favor signify by saying aye.
>> Aye.
>> Any opposed? Motion carries unanimously. Thank you.
Moving on to the regular agenda item, resolution 8625.
This is a regular agenda item.
I think the staff has a presentation.
>> Good evening, Mayor and town council.
Amanda Barnes, Director of Utilities.
Tonight, I'll be presenting to you a contract to replace
our existing water metering system with
a newer technology known as advanced metering infrastructure.
During this presentation, I will explain why this project is necessary,
provide you a review of our existing metering system,
an explanation of what the proposed metering system,
how the proposed metering system will benefit the town and our customers.
Scott Reynolds, our finance director,
will discuss the request for proposals and the proposed funding option for the contract.
Then I'll close in providing public education and training and key takeaways.
The town's water system covers a service area of approximately 58 square miles,
extending through the town's municipal boundary through the town of
Juno Beach and into unincorporated areas of Martin and Palm Beach Counties.
Currently, our water metering system includes
31,243 residential and non-residential meters.
The purpose of this project is to replace the existing water metering system that is
at the end of its 20-year useful life with a new metering system,
that is newer technology that will address existing metering deficiencies,
improve operational efficiencies, and enhance customer service features.
The proposed contract includes
a two-year construction implementation contract with
Core & Main to furnish and install the new metering system.
It also includes a Software as a Service and Spectrum Lease Agreement with Sensus,
which consists of a 10-year initial term,
followed by an automatic 10-year renewal for
a total 20-year contract term for the software and network lease.
The proposed Sensus meters are warrantied for 20 years.
As such, the supporting software and network also need to
be in place for the 20-year life of the meters.
Our request for proposal included the requirement for the respondents to
include the 20-year cost for the software and
the network subscription fees for the purpose of us to avoid
large subscription fee increases in
the future and also to assist with future operational budgeting.
We do know what those subscription fees will be for the 20-year term of the contract.
The installation of the existing metering system began in 2006.
Next year in 2026,
parts of the system have reached 20 years of service.
The existing system is referred to as an automatic reading system or an AMR system.
Customer water usage data is collected once a month by
utility field service representatives who drive
by the meters in vehicles equipped with mobile data receivers.
The collected meter readings are downloaded into a database when the
utility field representative returns to the office at the end of the day.
Monthly meter readings are then used to generate
the monthly water bills by customer service staff.
Before AMR was implemented in the town,
meters were read manually.
Ninety-nine percent of the existing meters,
or approximately 31,000 of the existing meters,
are what we consider small meters.
They're two inches in diameter and smaller,
mostly one-inch and three-quarter-inch meters.
Those meters are approaching at or very near to their 20-year useful life.
The existing small meters have internal mechanical parts that wear with use,
and nearly half of our existing small meters have failed over the past five years.
They continue to fail at the rate of about 450-500 a month.
Our staff has incurred overtime,
put in extra effort during the workday to keep up with
the failing mechanisms on the existing meters,
and it has become a burden on staff to operate and maintain the existing system.
Accuracy testing was conducted on a sampling of existing small meters,
and that testing indicates that once
the meters have been in service for more than 15 years,
they are 7.3% less accurate than if they were less than 10-years-old.
This translates to a missed revenue of about $1.3 million a year.
The reduction in accuracy is a result of
the wear of the internal components that actually measure the flow,
so 94% of the town's small meters are greater than 10-years-old, currently.
Only 1% or 316 of the existing meters in our system are considered large meters,
greater than two inches in diameter.
The majority of those are ultrasonic,
so they do not have internal moving parts.
There are a few older meters on fire lines that haven't been used because we haven't,
thankfully, had any fires in those locations.
Those would be proposed to be replaced under this contract.
The existing large meters,
we're proposing instead of replacing them if they're 10 years or younger
to just retrofit their data transmitters.
The existing AMR system has reached the end of its 20-year useful life.
Due to the high number of register failures,
it has become a heavy burden for staff to operate and
maintain while also fulfilling other necessary responsibilities.
AMR has become an outdated technology.
The proposed metering system,
known as advanced metering infrastructure or AMI is
a comprehensive smart metering system that transmits near
real-time data over a secure communications network.
Why should we consider transitioning to AMI for our water meter reading purposes?
In addition to resolving the failures and
challenges that I described with the previous slide,
as a newer technology,
AMI will provide the town and our water customers with benefits that
the existing system is not capable of and opportunities for future enhancements.
AMI provides daily reads,
enabling customer service staff to provide
faster response and better service to customer inquiries,
whereas the existing system only provided monthly data.
By transmitting meter readings on a daily basis,
AMI will also supply customers, service staff,
and water customers with the ability to detect trends in unusually high water use,
which can aid in early detection of leaks,
avoiding high water bills,
and possible costly repairs resulting from undetected leaks.
The Sensus meters to be installed under
the proposed contract have no internal moving parts,
and they are guaranteed for accuracy for 20 years.
Sensus' network and metering equipment is proven
reliable and is in use by neighboring utilities such as Tequesta,
Seacoast, Palm Beach County,
Miami Dade, and many others across South Florida and the nation.
Core & Main is able to fully transition Jupiter's water system to Sensus AMI,
utilizing existing town infrastructure, i.e, towers.
No new towers will need to be constructed for Sensus to convert our system to AMI,
whereas the other respondent proposals did require additional towers to be constructed.
Sensus also does not require the use of commercial cellular service for their system.
They own and operate the network on which communication will occur.
The Sensus AMI system will provide the town's water customers
with access to their daily usage through a customer portal,
can be accessed on a computer or a smartphone application.
Customers will be able to set thresholds for
high bill alerts and access information to better
understand their water use trends and control their use of water through conservation.
Finally, AMI will provide utility field representatives with
opportunities to perform proactive and improve system maintenance,
which is very challenging now,
considering the failures that we've had.
They'll still be able to take care of
their required customer service field tasks, meeting with residents,
assisting with field notifications,
and then also providing needed support for other distribution system maintenance needs.
This slide just provides a simple illustration of how data will be transmitted over
an AMI system where the smart meters located at the homes collect.
There's an antenna box that will be installed next to the existing meter box.
That antenna will transmit the data securely to existing towers,
which will then transmit the data to the software database and customer service,
and customers will then have access to that data.
Scott Reynolds will now come up and present financing.
>> Good evening. Scott Reynolds, I'm the finance director for the town of Jupiter.
We talked about this project during the budget process this summer.
In fact, I think it was Councilor Guisinger who
led the charge on that initially to talk about return on
investment and those type of discussions
surrounding the large capital investment of replacing all the meters.
Amanda and her staff,
they had went out to bid.
They requested proposals and they received three proposals,
and then were evaluated by their staff,
and the selection committee selected and ranked
Core & Main based on the proposal rankings.
They went back and they negotiated,
as Amanda and her team do,
try to get the best price for their payers.
They will negotiate a contract, and that's what they did.
They went back and they negotiated a lower price based on the bid,
savings of just over $5.5 million,
almost $5.6 million less than what was bid.
That was based primarily on a shorter implementation time.
I have to give it to Amanda and her team,
they're looking for a quick rate of return.
This leads back to some of the discussions we had over the summer
about revenue being unrecognized or
being lost due to the mechanics of the current legacy meters that are in the ground.
The mechanics and the meters,
they wear down over time.
They always fall in the customer's favor as far as
registering less revenue or less water going through the meter.
Get to the next slide.
What they've estimated is about $1.3 million
in unrecognized revenue annually going forward.
Time is of the essence to try to replace these meters with something more accurate.
The mechanics of the new meters that are being recommended, they're not there.
There is a 20-year guarantee on these meters,
which is very important,
comes into why are we requesting a 20-year contract?
Well, that coincides with the lifespan of
the meters that we're talking about placing in the ground.
If you can just do quick math,
$1.3 million over 11-year period,
it's already paid for what we're requesting from
capital investment and some operating costs of just over $14 million.
We will have to advance some money in the CIP to help pay for this,
but we've also went back and looked at carry forward dollars.
I know we heard that loud and clear from the council.
They wanted us to look for
sunsetting projects that were coming at the end of the fiscal year,
so we did some of that.
We got some savings of about $2.2 million in FY '25 carry-forward money to help pay for
this along with $3.7 million in
the large and small meter carry-forward dollars to help pay for it.
We have $14.3 million available outside of the pushing forward,
about 8.3 million from
the large and small meter future dollars that were
being requested to come from R&R funding.
But just wanted to make sure that the council
was aware of how we're requesting to fund this large endeavor,
and then also the good job by the utility staff in negotiating
a savings to the repayer for the implementation of the project.
Now, we will have to continue to spend
some operating dollars after the implementation every year for the 20 years.
But at the end of the 20 years,
we'll be going back out to bid again,
but we will have a total savings.
The last nine years,
if you still hold true of the $1.3 million in revenue reductions,
which that number only grows, that's today's dollars.
Going forward, those dollars would increase.
But if you just use that,
you're saving an additional $11.7 million on
those last nine years of service life of those meters.
With that, I'll turn it back over to Amanda,
unless there's some specific questions you have for me.
>> Thank you, Scott. The utilities and community relations Departments
will collaborate with Core & Main team to develop an outreach program to
inform and educate our water customers regarding implementation of
the new metering system and how it will impact them and what we need from them.
One of the things that will be needed from customers is for them
to make sure that we have a three foot clear space around the meter box,
which that is a town standard and it's a standard in our construction,
guidelines and contracts right now.
So it's not anything new,
but we will be sending out notices to residents,
asking them to review the area around their meter box and remove
anything that they would like to keep if there's landscaping, they want to relocate.
They can go ahead and do that or any personal items.
They can remove those,
and it will also give us an opportunity
to meet with the resident and communicate about the project.
The methods that we'll use to reach residents will include mail,
door cards, Bill inserts,
the website, email blast, social media posts.
Then, of course, we're always available for in person meetings and phone calls.
Our community relations director also has experience with implementing an AMI system and
messaging or providing outreach communication to residents at a previous employment.
He's well versed in doing this and he said he's willing to help us with that.
Then finally, town staff will also receive training from
Core & Main and Census on the use of the new system.
Census will be responsible for operation and maintenance of the software and the network.
The town will not have to provide staff for that.
Just some key takeaways.
The AMI system that is proposed in the contract before you is proven technology.
It is successfully being utilized by neighboring utilities.
The town's response to customer service will be improved with this new system,
and customers will have access to their water use,
will they will be able to identify areas for water conservation and
also get early detection of leaks and hopefully save money in the long run,
not having to wait till the water bill comes to realize that they had
a high water bill and had a leak that caused damage that they weren't aware of.
The AMI system in the contract before you offers the best warranty in the industry,
guaranteeing metering accuracy for 20 years.
There are batteries with these meters.
The battery life is also one of the best in the industries,
15 years, full warranty on the batteries five year pro rated warranty.
The MI system propose makes use of existing town infrastructure,
[LAUGHTER] which is a relief to me that no new towers need to be constructed.
I remember what the police Department had to go through to get the tower constructed.
And then Core & Main is able to fully transition the town system in a two year period,
which would be helpful in many ways because
of the existing condition of the existing metering system.
Census also has the ability to provide
redundant backup networks because they do service the neighboring utilities.
In the event of a storm, for some reason,
one of our antenna towers goes out,
they have redundant backup to the north and to the south of us.
Consideration in our decision was given to retrofitting our existing system,
but based on the overwhelming number of failures that
we've had and that continue to occur,
the reduced accuracy of the meters that is occurring and the age of the existing system.
It's my opinion that it's not in our best interest to
retrofit or try to put a band aid on the existing system.
It's old technology and it should be replaced.
With that, I will take any questions that you might have.
>> Any questions? Counsel Geiger?
>> Yeah, I got a few. For the towers,
Will they get a special antenna or
a base station or something like that for transmitting.
>> Yeah. There will be antennas and base stations placed in the locations.
I do have representatives from Core & Main and [inaudible].
>> Let me start with the box in the ground first with the meter.
Will I have an antenna inside of it then for transmitting to a base station at Tower?
>> It'll look like a dome inside.
So we'll be putting a circular.
Let me go back to this slide.
It might be hard to see,
but in the picture next to the house on that slide,
you'll see the meter box and next to it is a circular box,
like an irrigation system box.
>> Correct.
>> The antenna will be located in the in that.
>> So that'll be above ground or will be covered by the little current water box.
>> It'll be set on the meter the lid.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah.
[inaudible]
[BACKGROUND]
>> That was my question.
>> State your name.
>> Good evening. I'm Dwyane Self.
I'm the regional initiative manager for Core in Maine for the AMI Smart Meter initiative.
Appreciate the opportunity to talk about it.
The antenna itself at the meter box,
think of it as a mushroom type looking little device that she described earlier,
and it's about an eighth of an inch thick as far as what would be above.
We can get that in
a recess type lid as well so that it basically sits flush with the lid. There's no
>> So no issue about Mowers running a [OVERLAPPING]
>> Not as long as they're not [OVERLAPPING] scalping I'll say scalping the yard,
piling up dirt with it or something like that.
It's generally not a problem.
It can be replaced as well.
It's a separate piece from the meter so you can replace the housing.
>> When I get to the tower,
is that like some type of just an antenna or a base station,
some type of equipment that gets mounted the tower.
>> In each tower, there is a base station that goes there.
It's a small box that's
about maybe the side a little bit smaller than a college refrigerator.
It's a small little box that sets
down low on the grounds for easy maintenance and access.
There's a coax cable goes up the tower or water tank or whatever we're attaching it to,
and we put a fiberglass standard ampinol antenna
similar to what cell phone companies use,
that kind of thing to transmit down to it.
>> I know you mentioned the meter,
but does the antenna and the base station all have the same 20 year warranty?
>> We're doing network as a service on this particular project,
which what that means is it's similar to
a cellular plan where the infrastructure is on me.
If it fails, that's not the city's problem.
It's my problem. We'll come in and fix the base stations and antennas and that stuff.
You're only concerned about
the radio transmitter at the house and the meter at the house,
and those are the 20 year warranted items.
>> Then the base stations covered by the annual fee repaying of
355825 [OVERLAPPING] Another question.
How long is the RNR?
What will take the RNR meter at a given residence?
RNR. Take off the existing meter and put in the.
I'm sorry. Remove and replace.
>> It depends, but it's a very short process.
I would say 10-15 minutes if we don't run into any random issues that will pop up.
Sometimes it's an access issue getting to it or
locating it or if we get there and discover a leak or something.
But in general, let's call it 10 or 15 minutes.
>> I'm just wondering how long the customer be with
disrupting the water you see so. It's very minimal.
>> It's very minimal we do have a process in place.
Typically, when we go to change out a meter, we look at it,
see if it's the meter that's there is currently being utilized.
We'll go generally knock on the door.
Try to make sure if there's a resident there,
they're aware that they're going to be out of water for some period of time.
For businesses, we will be contacting those businesses,
and a lot of times we'll do some of those after hours,
if it's a restaurant or something,
we don't want to shut them down or something like that.
We'll just try to pick a time
that they're either closed or it's a weekend that they're not open,
if it's a hair salon shop or something like that,
we'll work with those customers.
>> The AMI meters provided by Sensus,
they are ultrasonic and not electromagnetic.
>> They are electromagnetic on the small meters?
>> That's why I want to ask because they've got
better accuracy for the small meters, so. Okay.
>> Correct.
>> Director Barne you mentioned that customers
only get US mail and they want to have a scheduling conflict,
how can they then coordinate with the town or
with the supplier here a schedule for when they want to [OVERLAPPING]
>> You mean if they only get US mail?
>> Yeah. They may not get texts and [OVERLAPPING]
>> We will have phone numbers in the letter that for them to contact us, yes.
>> In my last question. I appreciate the Math you guys did as far as identifying the
1.3 million per year in missed revenue and also the return on investment of,
I think you said 11 years.
That's great. One question on the 1.3 million missed revenue,
that will now be realized.
That means, what is
the expectation to the customer relative to an increase in our water bill?
>> I did look into that this afternoon.
Our average user is a 10,000 gallon a month consumption use.
Applying the 7.3% increase that we expect to see in accuracy,
and based on our current water rates,
I calculated $2.08 a month increase. Maybe.
>> Yeah. I looked at the 1.3 by across the 31,000 meters like $41 a year,
so that seems more realistic based on the usage. I appreciate.
>> It depends how large of a consumer.
We're in a conservation based rate structure.
The more water you use, the higher the rate is.
It could encourage conservation for sure.
>> There's an app that the homeowner will have.
He can look at his water usage,
look what time of day is the most used
and a little more conservative like to be conservation.
Thank you. Appreciate it. I have no other questions.
>> Thank you. One question I have is,
is there two way communication with the system,
which means is there a mechanism by which you can control or shut on or off the water?
>> There are meters that I think they're called ally.
The ally meters do have a feature that would
allow us to remotely turn on and turn off the meters.
Right now we're not recommending a full installation of those meters.
They are a higher dollar meter.
But we may strategically place them in areas in the system.
I haven't personally looked at that closely.
Jonathan has been managing this project and I know he has.
I believe we do plan on strategically placing some of those meters in certain locations.
But we won't do a full sale instalIation of them.
>> We don't need to. I understand if it did exist.
I saw that our water Master plan a couple of years ago.
My other question was related to what Counselor Geiger spoke with,
which is, our accuracy will improve,
but to a customer.
They'll just see their bill increase.
I just want to make sure that we're aware of the communication plan.
I'm glad to see that there is one.
Then the 20 year period struck me as long for technology,
especially a technology software item in particular.
Twenty year agreements, you say these other utilities
have 20 year agreements, is that right?
>> It's standard. Our current system has a 20 year.
I wouldn't call it an agreement because we didn't really have
a contract like we are for this one,
which is why I wanted to have a contract in place.
But it is normal for metering systems to have a useful life of 20 years.
Some of them make it 20 years,
some of them don't.
>> Thank you.
>> Some of my questions are answered,
the 20 year contract.
I've never seen a 20 year contract since I've been up here,
but I understand the reasoning behind it.
Are these what they call smart meters?
>> Smart meters.
>> Yeah. I know there was in the past,
when Smart Meters first came out,
people were afraid the utility could just shut your water off
or but you said you're going to place those somewhat strategically in the town?
>> Yeah. If we need to,
we will place them strategically,
we would never shut somebody off without
notifying them or for the proper notice and all that.[LAUGHTER]
>> I still needs to be manually in the box with the wrench and all that.
In regards to to the antenna,
what about land debris,
dirt getting on that dome and messing with the signal?
>> I have one at my house.
I've never had a problem with it.
It's in an area that's underneath an oak tree?
We've not had any problem.
Unless it gets covered in dirt, like buried.
I don't see that there would be a problem.
>> It sits outside the box.
>> It's in the lid of the box.
>> Some of the mowers are riders and they're heavy
so that they're durable and all that doesn't,
how often do they get damaged, usually?
Is there a percentage on that or
Sure.
The actual mushroom cap itself,
I'm not worried about somebody driving over it.
In fact, they are, call it light traffic rated,
got them placed in driveways and people can drive cars over them and that stuff.
As far as how frequently they're damaged,
it's not a every day thing. It does happen.
I would say the two most common causes I see with
damage is people burning lawn leaves and stuff in the fall,
and for some reason, they decide to burn it over the top of meter box and melt it down.
Occasionally, we do have some that get hit by a lawn mower.
Usually that's an education process.
If you're mowing your grass at the millimeters,
that thing, scalping it,
it's really not good for the lawn anyway.
But the other side of it is just making sure
that if the box sets a little bit high in the yard,
we lower it down and work with the home.
Main concern is a lot of people have just lawn maintenance services,
and these guys come in with the riding mowers and they're
just running around, they don't care what they hit.
They're trying to get the job in quickly,
so things need to be flushed to the ground
and even lower than a scalping more like a homeowner we do.
I said, we've got many systems in the surrounding area.
We did almost 200,000 of these in Palm Beach County and it happens,
but it's not a common everyday occurring.
Just don't think it happens. A lot of times unless they really get deep with the damage,
you can replace the housing and you're just fine,
long as you don't Breach the housing where moisture can get into the electronics.
I imagined I'm not a meter expert.
The old meters probably had some impeller inside than when the water and through
it spun spinning device, let's that.
How do these work?
This is what they call an electromagnetic magneter,
and essentially, it places a charge,
let's call it a very low voltage field of energy,
if you want to call it that and what it's looking for
is as water has some type of mineral in it.
Let's call it iron,
calcium, some particulate,
and it knows how much water is in the pipe,
and it measures the speed of what things
are going past the sensors that are in the meter,
so it's able to deduce very accurately.
It's not a new technology.
Magmeter technology has been around since the 1800s.
It knows the volume and it's just reading the speed and calculating.
Correct.
Volume. Interesting.
It's very old, very reliable.
Typically in the past,
you had to have electricity to make it work.
Evolution of battery technology is what's all evolved
this into being able to do this in a residential application.
Is a lithium battery inside or solar or how does it work?
It's a lithium type of battery.
It's a very long range type of battery technology that census has.
We've had very good results.
We sold our first Flex system Florida in 2007 in Apopka and they're still ticking along.
Been doing this 20 years now and some of
the earlier systems that I sold are still up and running.
It must be a super low voltage.
Very low voltage and it also uses capacitors so it's not like a constant on,
I just is a slow drain on the battery a constant poll.
Got you. I think that's it. Thank you. Appreciate it.
Thank you.
Thank you. Director Amander and your staff done a great job.
A lot of my questions have been answered,
but I want to go back to your comment earlier
about approximately 450 to 500
right now failures that staff have to go out and make repairs.
Yes.
Staff a lot of time and revenue.
It cost a lot of money to go out there.
What are we going to be saving when?
Once this is all done,
and we don't have that issue anymore.
That's a cost savings by itself so in 2025,
we estimated just on staff time to address the failed registers.
We probably spent about $110,000 in staff time.
Some of that was overtime.
Some of that was during the regular.
[OVERLAPPING] It basically took staff away from doing other duties.
That what they have.
On that 20 year contract,
it's just to correlate with the life of the product itself and the meters.
The antenna, I was very glad you got clarification on that because I
was trying to figure out how it was not going to get damaged.
The battery life, and you've mentioned,
I think it was a Popca,
a 2007, and they're still going strong.
When the batteries do fail at whatever point it might be and maybe never,
how do you not how does that work that you know the batteries died?
If we won't be able to get we won't get a read back.
I'm sure the system would probably allow.
I didn't know the system had a way of communicating that back.
The good thing about the small meters is if the battery fails,
which means the register fail,
we can get a manual reading on it as well,
which we cannot do right now with many of our existing meters.
I was just going to say it does have a low battery alarm.
It takes every time it sends a transmission packet of data,
and it's not just the meter read,
it actually sends a packet of data.
One of the items that's in the packet is a battery voltage.
It keeps track of the battery voltage on the battery itself in the transmitter,
and when it starts detecting
a certain threshold where some will call it a low battery alarm,
which is usually about six months of life left in the battery,
it'll flag and say,
I've got a low battery.
That gives you an opportunity to go out and do some proactive maintenance type processes.
The other side, you did mention it as well is there is a transmitter in the field,
there is a meter in the field,
that's a separate device.
If the transmitter fails,
you can go out and get the reading off of the meter.
If the meter fails,
because it's pulling the data up from the meter on an hourly basis,
you can go and get the transmitter data
up until the point of failure of the meter itself.
The data doesn't disappear.
It's stored in two different locations.
The resident would never really even know this was happened,
you're going to get the notice first through your data supply?
Yes.
The last question and you talked about it,
the small increase that the resident will have on a monthly basis.
Communication, you've been very succinct on how we're going to get it out there.
I think that's real important because they can relate to smart technology,
new technology, and to the accuracy will be there for them to control.
I think that's a real highlight of this product.
Thank you for your hard work.
You're welcome.
Any more questions. Seeing no,
I'll take a motion in a second.
I'll make a motion to approve.
Second.
Just for discussion. I didn't have any questions to ask,
but I cannot support the contract award so first of all, let me make it clear.
I have no issue with regard to the need for the project.
I have no issue with regard to recommended contractor equipment or services.
I support of that.
I can't support the contract award on the basis of
my longstanding differences of opinions about the War of utilities,
procurement, fiscal management and contract negotiation practices.
Sum rate key takeaways.
Calling main was deemed by
the water utility staff to be the most qualified and therefore,
it's top rate for the project.
I may even agree that they were the most qualified.
But their net based bid prices were 4.7000003 million
higher than a little bitter for the width
versus without optional equipment scenarios respectively.
It's a big cost difference.
I would have liked to have seen that be pursued further.
The claim contract negotiation with CNM,
staff top rank firm result in scope of work and associated cost reductions.
That was the millions of dollars so it's always the case when
you talk about if you can reduce costs.
That could well have been the case with the apparent little bidder.
However, we don't have that information because of the town's procurement practices of
negotiating with its preferred supplier.
The claim financial benefits for water meter accuracy improvements,
estimated at 1.3 million per year from, increased water revenues.
Let me say this clearly.
From a water utility customer perspective,
and also mine is elected official.
This would actually represent a water rate hike and not a financial benefit to them.
Net evaluations and spending decisions should always
be performed on a net customer benefit basis.
Historically, we knew we've always known that
meters over the course of time work in the favor of the customer.
But that's built into our system.
I don't think anybody will be surprised on the diets that the
next time somebody comes and asks for an annual increase.
I'm going to ponder about gee,
already got their increase because we're so more to consumption.
We're now saying it's higher and it is, I get it.
But the point is,
I just evaluate things differently.
You should always look from the customer benefit basis.
The expedited implementation schedule for a full conversion from
five years to two years reportedly resulted in $1 million savings.
The implementation schedule change will effectively
consume a net 1.5 years of a new meters useful life.
This should have been taken into account in the project decision,
evaluation as I've long advocated.
We could have managed in my opinion,
the fact that I think the existing meters were
replaced over a much longer schedule basis period.
I think it might have been as much as ten years,
but it's not worth asking the question whether it was seven,
ten, I was over many years.
It would be predictable to me that the oldest ones would be the ones you'd be
replacing so you don't have to do 100% of them to really knock that number down.
I believe you should be able to tell based on how long they're in there
so I would have that's the way in my former day job,
how we would have managed the project differently.
Then the annual software lease agreement,
cost increases were 3% a year,
which exceeds the historical 20 year inflationary rate.
I think this should have been negotiated for annual increases at CPI or less.
With an not to exceed annual cap.
That's the business storm I'm familiar with.
I tell you, I'm sure we all feel the same way.
A lot of these projects when they have a ongoing future cost that is going to exceed CPI,
I wonder how we're going to cover that cost in the future.
These are just issues.
I've said everything here before.
I just have different approach to how this would have been done.
Whether it came out with a different outcome.
I know the evaluation would be claiming benefits that are claimed here,
but we'll never know so with that,
we have a motion in a second.All in favor,
signify by saying aye.
I just want to quickly say something.
I do want to say that to the customer,
there is also a benefit.
I think it is more complex and nuanced,
as Councilor Guisinger said.
With the cost, which I think we're all concerned about,
I think the resident will see it.
As an increase.
Granted a $2 increase,
but I think we're sensitive to that.
But there's also an increased level of service.
I think understanding and being able to track daily use,
all the information at our fingertap tips that we've never had before on a daily basis.
The ability to better conserve water and resources town wide,
I think is really valuable.
I just want to share that,
I think that it's very nuanced and complex,
and I think there are some of this is not ideal.
The rates of failure that we're dealing with,
we need to do this and get it done.
But there's some real good in
this technology and I know that we have been talking about it,
at least since I joined Council in 2022.
I want to say thank you for the work that you've done.
I know that this is a big project.
The utility is also an enterprise fund,
and it's quasi run like a business where so you're
distributing your product and you're not being compensated
efficiently so I think you need to get everything up to speed.
That's built in the race.
They want to debate and by the way,
I know there's other benefits.
I'm going based on the way it was presented here was I'm just used to
a much different totality of evaluation
where those benefits could have been taken account.
We had a we water leak in my house that wasn't caught by the
original I was stunned that the utility never called me to tell me,
but they didn't have that capability.
There can be you better believe I got a significant water bill.
It of people had.
Particularly in heavy tree area neighborhoods.
I understand all that,
but I think the points I made were valid and I just would like to going four someday.
For these thing, the evaluations be done differently and taking this into account,
then I'd be more comfortable about it.
With that, we have a motion to second all in favor,
signify by saying aye.
Aye.
>> Posed made, the motion carries 4:1 with Mayor Kuretski to start off.
Moving on to Resolution 120-25,
approving contracts to four contractors for general contracting continuing services,
turn it over to staff.
>> Good evening, Mayor, Council.
For the record, George Dzama,
the Director of Engineering and Public Works.
Please to request Town Council's approval of Resolution 120-25 in
the Award of four Continuing Services Contracts to Catchment Construction,
RCAS LLC, Proctor Construction,
and Fierce Construction for General Contracting,
and a combined amount not to exceed $6 million
for a three-year term with two optional one-year renewal terms.
This is a versatile contract that is intended to be utilized by multiple departments,
in addition to engineering and public works.
There's parks, utilities, planning and zoning.
All departments that are responsible for facilities.
The contract scope is outlined in the executive summary.
Some of the highlights are the building and facility site work.
We have building construction,
including structural, mechanical, electrical,
plumbing, building roofing, building envelope,
and weather protection, and site monument construction.
The contracts will be used for budgeted projects,
unless otherwise approved by the council.
Projects will be assigned via work order based on availability of funds,
project costs, and availability to meet project schedules.
In addition, projects will be based on price,
responsiveness, and quality of workmanship.
Most project assignments will have a value of less than 300,000.
There were some projects,
higher-scale projects that were included in the bid that are attached,
which are included in the fiscal year 2026,
CIP, and operating and maintenance budgets.
Most of those projects are park facility projects as well
as a few public works and utility storage building projects.
The intent of this contract is much like
the resurfacing contract that was awarded at the last council meeting.
However, this is strictly for buildings and facilities,
and the procurement process was a request for proposal in which
the contractors were selected based on prices,
qualifications, and an understanding of the contract intended use.
The score sheet from the selection committee is also attached in the agenda item.
I'm pleased that there were 11 bids received,
so there's a great interest in doing work for the town and working with our staff.
Two of the bidders were deemed non-responsive as there was
a requirement for a Florida general contractor license.
I also would like to mention the benefits of the contract.
Much like the street resurfacing contract,
this contract will provide cost control and accelerated contract time.
It also will assist with staff workload for facility maintenance projects.
Some of the larger-scale mechanical,
electrical and plumbing projects can be utilized by this project to alleviate
stack workload for some of
the smaller-scale projects that could be utilized with in-house staff.
Also, this project was bid with FEMA provisions.
Work can be reimbursed and declared emergency revents.
One final note was that this contract was bid prior to
the bid qualification requirement for experience modification rate, or EMR.
However, staff confirmed that the contractors had an EMR of one.
With that, I'll answer any questions.
>> Any questions?
>> Just quickly. Tell me,
do you have any idea what the staff savings will be with this six million here?
>> It's hard to say because the projects are the smaller-scale projects,
and they'll be awarded on an individual project basis.
But the cost savings that we'll see can range anywhere from 10-15%
because the bid form provided the in-house
labor rates as well as subcontractor markup and material markup.
Some of the mark-ups that we received in the bids were 5%,
which is about 10% cheaper than usual bids that are about 15.
>> Then, with the FEMA reimbursement,
is that a wash?
Are we not getting FEMA reimbursements now for what we might get with this contract?
>> This is just a provision that we have in the bid a lot oftentimes to get reimbursed.
I can't speak for what was cost reimbursement in the past because I was not here,
but typically to utilize
vendors to be reimbursed for infrastructure repairs.
FEMA provisions need to be implemented in the bid.
They require bids.
This will just accelerate the time that we can get
projects done and we can get reimbursed quicker.
>> Thank you.
>> You are welcome.
>> Vice Mayor.
>> No questions, but I like the structure of this.
You did a nice drama with this. Appreciate it. Thank you.
>> Councilor Sundstrom.
>> My question answered.
Interesting material markup information there. Thank you.
>> No questions for me. Thank you.
>> Can you just explain probably in here and I hadn't seen,
but the work authorization process,
are all work authorizations signed without coming to counsel?
Because I've seen this recently,
where we had there may be a general dollar threshold.
I don't know what it exists,
but is there a dollar threshold that does come to council even
though you'd be using these contracts, question?
>> The intent was to utilize the threshold values within our procurement policy.
For say contracts less than $50,000,
it can be authorized by the town manager.
But projects with work order values greater certainly will go before council.
Most of the projects will be under 300,000 so they could be presented.
>> You answered the question and just to be clear,
so there's nothing in this that says whether it goes to
the council or nothing in the agreement,
because that's something perhaps we as a council can look at.
I'm okay with having a higher dollar value being authorized by the town manager.
Most contracts we see are not this type of contract.
It clearly says the mayor,
with the council,
makes the decision and other times town manager.
Just leave it as an open item doesn't
affect the agreement that I think 50,000 is too low.
It's just the absence of seeing it jump out that is why I asked that question.
Did you want to say something about that, Mr. Reynolds?
>> Thank you, Mayor. What I want to just quickly say
is you've mentioned this a couple of different times,
we do have a new procurement manager on staff.
We are currently reviewing the procurement policy.
I envision that there's going to be some changes,
and maybe some of those changes are exactly what you're talking about.
There could be some changes in the thresholds based on these types of activities.
>> One of the things I just want to point out
and recognize staff on this particular work,
and I realize all work is different.
This is an engineering services contractor services,
but I'm grateful that the bid evaluation assigned 70% the cost.
That's what I always advocate.
A lot of them,
the cost historically had been a lot lower.
I'm comforted by that.
I was also comforted by the fact that all four staff members evaluated 1,
02, 3, 4 the same.
I take comfort in that because I do believe that these were senior evaluations,
and all of them, just the fact that they were the same, gives me confidence.
That may not always be the case,
but that's why in this case,
I think the threshold could be higher,
but again, that's something you could come back on.
Because for a threshold to be higher,
I just want to always make sure that cost is given appropriate consideration,
which, in some cases, it hasn't been.
Again, good work.
I do think that, as you know,
how do you pronounce your name?
I guess I've been scared to say it?
>> The D is silent, Dzama.
>> Dzama. Thank you.
Anyway, in a long time,
I think I've heard you say that we have unit prices,
so you're going to know the cost for those projects that are that well defined.
>> Well, that was for their street resurfacing,
for this contract, it's a little different.
We have labor rates and we have markup.
We generally know the scope,
so we can really pin down.
We have cost control. We'll put it that way.
>> Now, realize, we talked earlier today,
the copy that I saw didn't have the amount
of unit rates because it wasn't in the hard copy that I got.
But anyway, I'm comfortable with this and appreciate answering the questions.
Thank you. If there's no more questions,
I'll take a motion in a second to approve Resolution 120-25.
>> Motion to approve.
>> Second.
>> Motion and a second. All in favor,
signify by saying aye.
>> [OVERLAPPING] Aye.
>> Motion carries unanimously.
Moving on to reports, Town attorney?
>> I have no report. Thank you, Mayor.
>> Town Manager?
>> Thank you, Mayor. Just a few things.
In October, residents began receiving invitations to
participate in the town citizen survey, as you all know.
Just for information purposes,
the survey is being operated by POCO,
the nation's leader in resident engagement in polling,
which conducts a science-based study for the town.
For those who POCO selected to take part in the survey,
you have until December 15 to complete the survey.
Selected participants will receive a postcard reminder in the mail in the coming days,
reminding them about how to participate.
Also, as a follow-up to an item that was raised during
the last town council meeting the town completed
construction on stormwater drainage improvements along Bush Road last Wednesday,
November 26, and the road has been reopened.
Next week, a contractor will perform asphalt milling and overlay to complete the project.
During this final phase of the project,
the road will remain open,
and flagman will manage traffic.
The town plans on using its social media website and email platforms to
communicate with the public about this roadwork before it begins.
Also, yesterday, the town launched
the new Citizen Recognition program called Jupiter's Home Town Heroes,
and this program allows residents to nominate a fellow resident,
business owner or volunteers who make a difference in the Jupiter community.
Once a nomination is received,
it'll be evaluated by a committee of town staff,
and those individuals selected will be honored at a town council meeting.
We began promoting this program yesterday through
the Town's social media email distribution list and website,
and have already begun to receive nominations, which is great.
We will continue to promote the program through
all of our distribution channels and look forward to
celebrating the community members who make us uniquely Jupiter in the near future.
I wanted to provide you with an update on our negotiations with
the PBA regarding a contract for our police sergeants and officers.
After multiple months of negotiations,
I'm happy to announce that the town and PBA have
reached a tentative agreement on a contract.
The PBA has scheduled a vote by our officers and
sergeants to ratify this contract on December 12 and December 15.
I also want to remind you that this ratification by
the officers is the required first step in the contract approval process.
Should the union ratify the contract,
we will bring the contract to the town council for a vote at the next available meeting,
and if all goes well,
that will be January 6, 2026.
We will not let any grass grow under our feet.
If that contract gets ratified,
you will see it at the first meeting in January.
Unfortunately, given the dates that they've selected,
I won't be able to get it on the agenda for the last meeting of the year.
>> Also, I want to close by reminding everyone of some of
the holiday events that occur in the town in the weeks ahead.
This Friday, December 5,
the town will hold its annual holiday tree lighting.
This year, the event has been moved to
the Town Green located here on the municipal campus.
I'm sure many of you saw the decorations and how amazing this campus looks right now.
I can't wait to see what it's going to look like on Friday night when the tree is lit up.
The event will begin at 5:00 PM and will feature food trucks,
performances by local schools and community groups,
and at 6:25 PM,
the official lighting of the Town's tree for the first time at the Town green will occur.
On Saturday evening, the annual Holiday Boat parade will be held and
should arrive in Jupiter between 7:30 and 8:00 PM.
On Saturday, December 13,
the town will hold its annual snow place like Jupiter event.
This event, always a favorite of children who get to play in the real snow,
will be held at Abacoa Community Park from 3:00 PM until 6:00 PM.
The annual JTAA holiday parade will occur on Sunday, December 14.
As a reminder, the town does not set the route for the parade.
We work with the JTAA committee,
and they select where they would like to have the parade,
and then we work to support their wishes,
which is what has occurred again this year. That's my report, Mayor.
>> Thank you. Councilor Choy?
>> Thank you, Mayor.
First, I want to thank all of the students that submitted
for the centennial art and poetry contest.
The winners were extraordinary.
The talent at such a young age.
Question for our town manager.
Will any of the winning entries can we get any recopy?
They were great.
I don't know what you call them when you get something that's reproduced from it?
Yeah, print. Thank you.
Just a thought.
They were great.
I also want to thank Chief Tennessee for that great update on the vessel. Thank you.
Again, to thank our Jupiter Police Department for everything that they do.
The town campus is like Disneyland.
I came in here tonight,
and I felt like a little kid in a candy store.
It looks beautiful.
It absolutely looks great.
I do want to thank all of the staff for their presentations tonight.
There was a lot of work put into everything,
and I do appreciate it. Thank you.
>> Vice Mayor.
>> Thank you, Mayor. The town green does look great.
You always said we're building everything out.
He said, "Do you see this thing?
It's going to look great." It really does.
But the lights just lit everything up. Just just one thing.
As you may or may not know,
Christmas is on a Thursday,
and town employees have Christmas Eve off, correct?
I would like to make a motion.
I think you all would agree to,
let's have the town employees to get the Friday off paid so they have a nice long break.
It's been a long year.
They've worked really hard,
so I would like to make a motion to give town employees December 26 off paid.
>> Just so it's clear,
they'll have Wednesday, Thursday,
is the current policy, correct?
>> That's correct, Mayor.
>> Okay. Then we're adding Friday.
We've done that before.
I'm okay with that. I just want to have the clarity of which was the days.
>> Yeah. It would be the 26th day after.
>> You want to make a motion for that?
>> I just did.
>> I would make it second [OVERLAPPING].
>> Motion to give town employees December 26 off paid.
>> I'll second the motion.
>> Motion and a second in favor signify by saying aye.
>> Aye.
>> Thank you, Vice Mayor. I know they'll appreciate that.
>> Nice break in the action. Thank you.
>> Anything else?
>> No, that's it.
>> There's three items. First of all, Town Manager,
the report about reaching
tentative agreement is the most thrilling thing I've heard in a while.
Oh, my gosh. Thank you.
I know there has been a lot of effort put into that by all parties and boy,
thank you for sharing that.
Obvious, hopefully you'll let us know as soon as you've heard the results from the vote,
and we are hopeful the tentative agreement means that it'll pass.
But it's been a long time.
We've been trying to get this done.
Thank you for the hard work and for getting it done.
The team and the union representatives.
No negative, all positive.
Thank you. Two small items.
I've been starting to use this as housekeeping things,
just to first of all,
and I think this is going to be addressed,
but it's interesting on the Bush Road closure,
when I saw when the town did the social media post that had been opened up,
and I had indicated that,
wow, I was really impacted by that.
I'm so glad when it opened up.
I already saw some people comment.
Well, it's going to be closed again for the intersection project.
I'm not asking for the answer here,
but in the weekly report,
because I would hope that maintenance of
traffic provisions would mean that it would not be closed,
but if it is going to be closed,
I bring this up now because the next time we see this as
a Council is when a contract award comes to us, right?
Normally there's maintenance of traffic,
but I don't know what that will mean.
If the engineering director can just share,
what's the expectation there with regard to whether Bush Road is going to
be closed for some period of
time for that when an intersection improvement project is done?
Again, I think the answer may be no,
but just to the degree that we may be getting questions
about that since it was just recently closed for close to two months.
I just would like all of us to get that answer.
Then lastly, it's a small item,
and I didn't bring it up,
but it's an important one nonetheless,
going forth because I believe what I heard about the water meter clearance requirements.
I'm sure it's not literal,
but I'll just say this.
I heard that there was a requirement of three feet of clearance around the meter box.
If I heard that correct and it wasn't worth bringing it up, first of all,
meters are generally coupled together,
two neighbors side by side, and one box.
It's always right on the property line,
and it's usually right on the front property line.
Well, that's a corner of the property so there's usually a sprinkler right there.
Hopefully, the clearance requirement doesn't take into account sprinklers,
or a lot of people are going to need to move sprinklers.
I don't think that's the case.
I can't imagine that's the case.
But then also, like my house happens to have a street light.
I can't imagine that's going to affect.
I think the answer is,
I'm just bringing that up to make sure that
they engineer it in a way that it isn't impactful because it
wasn't really clear what they meant by it has to be clear around the box.
I'm just trying to avoid and again,
they probably addressed it,
but now that was said tonight,
and I don't want to wait until letters start going out,
and people start thinking they have to relocate things that hopefully
they don't have to that's it. Councilor Sundstrom,.
>> I'll go in order,
I just made a quick list here.
First, I just want to make a point to the threshold,
the 50k threshold,
and our procurement standards.
I do hope that we look at that.
We haven't changed that threshold in years.
If we think about inflation,
everything else, the cost of doing business,
I am glad that we have so many items coming up here,
but I don't necessarily want that many.
I know other municipalities will do really high thresholds,
and they don't see a lot of what happens.
A lot of business doesn't come up to the Council.
I think we've had a good run,
but we do need to look at how costs have changed and our rate of doing business.
I would be supportive of that going forward,
and I'm glad it's being reviewed.
I didn't bring up an item tonight either,
but I did want to just bring attention to Item 7 which is the approval of
the 82-month purchasing agreement for the Police Department in car video system.
I think that's fantastic.
In the past, I've pulled items just to call out how we're using technology to improve
our operational efficiency and
effectiveness in our police department and public safety as a whole.
There are officers who to transfer the video in older systems,
it would take something like half an hour.
I mean, people are held up and across all the videos that they have to do.
It's taking a ton of time so I'm so grateful that that is done away with.
We have in place a couple of license plate readers around town.
Now every single vehicle will have that technology.
It's not just for stolen vehicles or other things like that,
it could be missing persons, or if someone needs help.
I love that we have that capability or that we're going to have that capability.
I love that it's going to serve our department, our officers,
and our public, and I love this use of technology.
I just think that the public should be aware of that,
that we're about to have all of this functionality and efficiency,
and it should be celebrated.
Thank you again, Jupiter Police Department.
That brings me to PBA.
I am so thrilled to hear that. You have no idea.
There's not much to say except for we're happy about this.
Then, the Hometown Heroes program,
thank you, Town Manager, for that.
I think we just recently celebrated an astronaut.
I've heard we had a [inaudible] award one time for a Grinch or other things.
But just recognizing all of the good in this town and all of
the incredible people in this town and the way they step
up in ways seen and unseen I think,
is just so worth highlighting and will be some good news.
We don't always have that in this world today.
I think it's a great small-town feel element. Thank you.
>> I think about being lash and just go ditto.
Whatever to say, but I
appreciate all the presentations made that night
and all the detail and hard work that went into all of it.
Good news with the PBA contract negotiation.
I think everybody feels the same.
Hopefully, that'll get ratified and behind us,
and we'll see it in January.
The Town Citizen Survey,
how will those results be communicated to the Council?
You guys may know, but now I'll at least ask the town manager.
>> Councilor, I can't see you with all this.
>> I know all the flowers.
>> [inaudible] but I'm sure you're down there, somewhere I can hear you.
What will happen is once we get the result,
we'll do a presentation for Council.
Typically, what happens is the vendors will come in and share with us the methodology,
how many surveys went out.
How they tallied up the results,
and then they'll go through the different classifications.
They'll tell us how we did,
and they'll do a comparative analysis with other municipalities,
our size and dimension,
I mean, the dynamics that we have.
It's usually a pretty comprehensive presentation.
>> Then will staff then put together action plans that we'll
see how we're going to address the significant comments?
>> Yes, we will. The first step of that is to present it to the Council.
We'll get a feel for what's coming.
But the first thing we want to do is get the direction from you
all on what's important to you and what you want to see done first.
I'm hopeful and optimistic that those survey results will be as they typically are,
which puts us pretty close to the top of most categories.
But the pressures on us right now and so we're anxious to see the results of that.
>> My last comment was,
I'm on the ears on for the Art Committee.
I had the benefit of sitting at the last meeting.
They actually went through all the various arts, poetry,
and poems, essays,
and everything put together and selected the winners.
I just witnessed the whole thing,
but I did listen in on the essays and the poems that were written by these students,
and they all were very good and emphasized why we love living in Jupiter.
I think they mentioned that they're going to be on the website.
I encourage members of the Council to go out and read them.
They're quite good. I know you asked for the artwork,
which is a lot of good work there,
but the essays and poems were quite good, also. Thank you.
>> I'm glad you brought that up because I was going to ask
the same question if we could get copies of those essays.
>> Just one follow-up,
that Councilor Guisinger brought up with regard to the Citizen survey, number one,
I think historically, we get a copy of the survey results before the presentation.
Because that's helpful, then when we get we then
can ask the consultants a one-time to ask them.
Then number two, because I know all of us spent a lot of time,
that's extremely important valuable information.
But if you didn't already know,
the specific questions that we add are always tailored towards
something that's significant to us from a potential policy setting item.
Probably most of us will go right to those questions as
the starting point because that's not how we've done.
It's what the citizens in Public are saying going forth on issues
of importance so very anxious to see that.
Because again, we picked that as a Council,
just a reminder of those questions.
With that, the time is now 9:06,
and I will adjourn the meeting.